# GRTE Whitebark Pine Summary and Plots

## Lydia M. Druin

#### Last Updated: 05/10/25

### Purpose:

This R Project is designed to be used to generate data summaries via tabular and plot formats. It is developed in such a way that users can run the code in this project with little or no R experience, in addition to incorporating data post-2024.

### Overview:

#### Folders:

Folder "GRTE Whitebark Summary and Plots" contains the R project, including all below folders.

1.  "data" contains:

<!-- -->

a.  "metadata", has files involving metadata like the monitoring protocol and the data dictionary
b.  "raw_data", has raw data files–see the files "GRTE_WBP_Collated_RawData_ConsistentFormat_LMDMay2025.xlsx" and "GRTE_WBP_ReviewedDataSet_QAQC_AllSurveyData_LMDMay2025.xlsx" for information regarding raw data and the data review process or contact Lydia Druin (lydiadruin\@outlook.com) for further info.
c.  "processed_data", files that are generated through the scripts of code
d.  "rds", has .rds files
e.  "review", has files for further review

<!-- -->

2.  "help" has files that may be helpful for operating R and/or this R project

3.  "output", has output files generated by the scripts of code and figures/plots generated by the code

4.  "scripts", has the scripts we will be running for this R projectFolder "GRYN Whitebark Summary and Plots" contains the R project, including all below folders.

#### Important Information Regarding Raw Data:

In 2024, LMD undertook a thorough data review as part of an effort on behalf of GRYN (Greater Yellowstone Network, Inventory and Monitoring Division, NPS) to assist GRTE with data from a long-standing whitebark pine monitoring program. This program was initiated in 2007 but has only had limited, internal reports prepared on it, and has been in the care of Nancy Bockino (GRTE/Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative). After collating data into a standardized format, reviewing the data in a pseudo-QAQC process, and identifying concerning data records, LMD reviewed the paper data sheets in 2025 for years 2007-2024. While this new review process did greatly reduce most alert/caution records, some remain.

Consequently, there are a few records (\~100 of approx 3000 total) that need additional field verification in the coming years of field sampling. Additionally, detailed notes of the process were prepared and can be found in data breakdowns and the xlsx files prepared by LMD.

*Importantly*, this means that if you are incorporating data post-2025, you should follow the same data review and processing procedure to ensure consistently and maximize data accuracy/quality!

#### Procedure:

First, you will need to download R and R Studio. Visit <https://rstudio-education.github.io/hopr/starting.html> for instructions!\
**Note:** You can open the "GRTE WBP Summary and Plots .rproj" file, which will open this README file and the scripts files directly in R Studio once you have downloaded R studio!

1.  Open "Step1_data_joining.R" contained in the "scripts" folder–this file joins the raw/limited review data with the site-based data

2.  Follow the code and execute it by putting your cursor on each line/command you want to run and clicking "CTRL + Enter"

3.  Once the code is completed, follow the processing steps noted at the end of the code and format the data accordingly (organize the columns mainly).

4.  Open the script "Step2_data_processing.R" and complete the code; then you may proceed with additional steps!

    Note: Save plots created in the code by running the lines of "ggsave" (line directly follows each plot), by right-clicking each plot image and saving, OR by following the "/help/saving_images_in_R.doc" file

**Cones and Known-Reproductive Trees:**

Frequently, we want to know information about trees that are confirmed cone-producers, or have been observed producing cones at least once during the monitoring program. To generate summary information and corresponding plots about known-reproductive trees, open ["scripts/Step6_repro_assessment.R"]{.underline}.

##### Notes about R:

The pound symbol, #, indicates a "comment"--this is a bit of "code" that is not intended to do anything! By typing \# at the beginning of a line, R will effectively ignore this piece. It is a note to the user!

**Upon exiting R,** it will ask you if you want to save your workspace. This is totally optional! It means that when you open Rstudio/this project another time, everything in your workspace/"environment" will load again from the previous session. This is not a substitute for saving copies of your data!

#### Procedure when Incorporating post-2023 data:

1.  Load WBP database file export into the "/data/raw_data/" folder
2.  Follow the prompts in the "data_summary.R" script for where you will make changes to the code.

### Notes:

1.  This code is designed to generate data summaries regarding the number of trees dying, infected with blister rust, infested with beetles, and/or producing cones. It will also explore the number of newly tagged trees entering monitoring each year/sampling period.
2.  Contact Laura Jones (laura_jones\@nps.gov) at GRTE or Erin Shanahan ([erin_shanahan\@nps.gov](mailto:erin_shanahan@nps.gov){.email}) at GRYN for WBP-specific questions, Lydia Druin (lydiadruin\@outlook.com) for data- and data management-specific questions, or for monitoring/field related questions, reach out to both Laura Jones and Kristin Legg (kristin_legg\@nps.gov) at GRYN to get in touch with Nancy Bockino.
3.  Session info, including R/R Studio and package versions is located at the end of each script.

#### Disclaimer:

This R project is designed to generate data summaries regarding trees monitored beginning in 2007 by a modified version of the Interagency Whitebark Pine Monitoring Protocol of the National Park Service Greater Yellowstone Network, Inventory and Monitoring Division, implemented at Grand Tetons National Park in cooperation with Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative and GRYN via Nancy Bockino. Data and/or code and its products are not to be shared outside of GRTE/GRYN without permission.
